He had a very humane regime in that country, which he was in, were not used to.
The Portuguese are not so present.
That's true.
So he brought with him and staff of all kinds of good people, scientists, artists.
Onspot, the topography of the country.
Describe the life and then the animals.
That's this book.
That was one of the books, yeah.
And can you remember the title of it?
And that is, it's a book devoted to the greatness of this prince, Moritz.
It's called Maurizia das M-A-U-R
I-T-I-A-D-O-S.
D?
D-O-S.
D or T?
D. D-O-S.
Moritiados.
And by the court... Master?
Uh-huh.
Court, right.
I know what you mean.
I can't think of it.
I know what you mean, though.
A man called Plante.
B-L-A-N-T-E.
So you found this in Denmark?
I found it in Denmark.
And I must say, I found it for it.
Absolutely nothing.
I couldn't even pay out of it.
That, when I came back, the book was completed, and everything is very, very completed.
That's one volume.
One volume.
But beautiful place, beautiful place.
And what year is the book?
1600.
Wow.
Seven, seven or eight.
Printed where?
In Brazil?
No, in Amsterdam.
In Amsterdam.
Great, great book.
So when I went to check in the first library that I could compare copy and they found out they didn't have the...
And I only knew what I had to pay for it.
I never had a coffee.
I didn't know much about the coffee.
So I mentioned the price.
He snapped it up, right?
And he said, that's good.
Yeah, all right, Nicole.
That's something I'm going to buy.
But then I found out when he said something like that, you could be sure you sold much under the price.
Because next week or next month, I got a catalog from one of the great, great German dealers from before the war.
It was already in there for thousands of marks.
And probably not nearly as nice as this one.
But I don't know.
It was a good book, sounds like that.
I find a good copy.
But it was what it was.
Now, I never regretted that when I had sold something.
It was clearly it was.
It was satisfactory to you, otherwise you wouldn't have... It was satisfactory to me, and in those days, hundreds of guilders, it was problems.
I mean, for three of the guilders, you could live in months.
And you sold that to the University of Amsterdam.
Oh.
That's here, so that's here.
I just had my hands on it.
I forgot, and that is where I, in a way, started.
Yes, thank you.
Dutch cookie.
It looks good.
Why do you suppose the book was so reasonable in Denmark?
Because in Denmark they needed money.
Everywhere they needed money.
Denmark was just out on the occupation and some of them had the occupation.
only in money.
Nobody had money.
In all of after the war, money around like flies in tropical countries, some day did that government decided that you had to deliver in all your money.
You couldn't deliver it in.
You couldn't get any compensation.
And you could get out with ten guilders.
That was it.
Then you had to start all over again.
I understand.
You bring in your cash, is that right?
And why were you supposed to bring it in?
Because of too much cheap money being around.
Inflation and... So they were going to start all over again.
Ten guilders.
Ten guilders could buy you, I don't know, food for a week.
And that was it.
This is right after the war.
So when you would, was it the same terms in Denmark?
In a way, yeah.
A foreign currency that you'd bring in?
In general.
I mean, did you make the same arrangement with them, that give me the books, and when I sell it, I'll pay you a... No, it is, but I would pay you straight away.
You're smiling.
No, I'm not smiling because I would have seen them at a higher size, but that was not a thing.
To find the book, that was a thing.
And because you have to realize in Denmark, they don't realize the significance of the book in Holland.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
I asked him a lot.
He'd tell you the price.
And the fact is, you didn't sell it for a tremendous amount either?
No, no.
A modest amount.
I mean, it's a good profit.
And it must please you that it's in a good place?
It's the best place in the world.
And does that matter to you, that your books find the best home?
No.
It's something I've always tried to achieve.
I always, not always, but in many cases, I was very sad and mad when I had decided this book was there and there and they didn't buy it.
And generally I was right because after all they should have bought it and they only told me they should have bought it.
Afterwards, when it was too late.
So you're not one of these booksellers who says, I don't want to sell to institutions.
You'd much rather sell to keep the book in circulation.
When you feel a book belongs someplace, that's most important.
First, the librarian of the Amsterdam University library.
Then, besides being a good true friend and teacher and columnist,
He was a man who knew books, had to know the specialty better than anybody had ever met after.
He loved books, he loved the language, knew what was good.
He had, he could provide the money.
You see, that's very important, you know, that... That's right.
...there's nothing in that rare who wants to buy a notice that has to say, I'm sorry, I have no money for you.
And I came, they did book the same book, that was another one.
And I didn't make the money for it.
So they told me that, yes, we're going to buy it.
He knew instantly the importance of the book.
Yeah, but he was much more trained.
But he didn't betray his enthusiasm, did he?
Not at all.
He was very cool in that respect, and rightly so.
He treated me like a human being, which was already rare in this country too, because the rare book man was not a very esteemed person, dealer.
I'm not going to call it.
Not?
No.
In your country, in the United States.
When I came for the first time to the United States, the difference in the approach... There was no commission.
And yet the European scholar, bookseller, I think to myself, that is the ideal.
bookseller yourself, the bookseller who understands the significance of the book.
I'm sure there have been occasions where you've discovered a book and you've explained to an institution why they should have it.
Absolutely.
And you've done, and go ahead, maybe you could... No, but that is exactly what happened, yeah.
And how do you determine, how do you determine the importance of the book?
I don't know.
I honestly don't.
I start buying it because I know that when you don't buy it, you won't probably ever see it again.
So there's no chance.
And you want to buy it.
And I learned one thing in my life that is a real customer, a real client for the book is always, he's already born, he's already dead, only three years.
Say that again now.
The buyer who wants to buy it, the client, he's already born.
He's there.
The only thing is you have to find him.
I have to find you.
More happens.
More often happens.
So you absolutely believe that.
The person who is correct for this book is out there somewhere.
Somewhere.
It's my job to find this.
It's only my job to find me, or his job to find you.
And generally speaking, if you have the book, do you think they will find you?
Absolutely.
There's no place.
Somewhere in one of the interviews I say, there's a very small town, nothing in all of it.
I don't write it down because I can't even spell it.
There's a call in the northern part of Romans.
That's nothing.
I think 50 people are living there.
And I once said, you can live in GTX, where you have to write a book.
You can be sure that a customer someday walks up and says, may I have a look at your books?
And that's true, absolutely.
And when you say it's a very small town, you mean the readership of book people?
First, it's a small town, as a small community.
And second, it is a small world, not a
It is a very small world.
That's one of the reasons.
Never tell fairy tales.
No, that is the most stupid thing you can do.
Never tell lies.
Never tell fairy tales.
Never try to cheat a client.
Not only because of decency, but just because you are out of business.
And your integrity is everything.
And the integrity in this tradition.
Absolutely.
Because once people feel that maybe you misrepresented something, or them, it's never the same.
I've never been the greatest person in the world.
And I've never had the ambition, yes, but not the capabilities.
On the other hand, I've handled a lot of interesting materials, and I've seen a lot of interesting clients.
I've been on friendly terms with many of the great book collectors in the world.
I've been on friendly terms with many of the great librarians in the world, and generally with most of my colleagues.
I don't think that I have
seen a chance to make money in the trade.
Well, they certainly have the highest regard for you.
Everyone has that I've taught.
I'm not afraid of the reason not to.
That's important, isn't it?
That's important.
And then, of course, you've been a publisher.
I've been a publisher.
I had your book, The Making of the Nuremberg Chronicles.
Which is a very fine book.
I met Harry and Wilson both are very nice.
William Wilsman was, he was a photographer, he was a printer, he was a philosopher.
He was a very nice man.
He didn't touch origin.
His parents, even his parents came to your country when he was, well, he was born in a country that they came to, and settled somewhere in the west.
And he was an amazingly nice man, and good.
Trustful, honest in his work, in everything.
And he became very good friends.
I met him through one of the Dutch authorities in this country.
who came to me and said, listen, I know Eileen Wilson.
Eileen Wilson wants to publish for a book.
He's going to talk about the Dutch.
I don't remember my chronicle.
Is there something for you?
I said, yes, of course there's something for me.
And you say that Eileen Wilson is a good man.
I take it for granted.
So he did the layout for the book.
I think altogether it became very interesting.
It's a well produced book.
Well, it's now 20-odd years old, I think, right?
Yeah, about.
I bought it in New York this past April.
I paid a good price for it.
Good.
It's what it looks like.
Yeah, I paid $125 for it.
We sold it for $70.
The book is worth it.
I was thrilled to get it.
And I went into Roger Stoddard from Harvard at the fair, and he says, what have you bought?
I said, this.
He says, great book.
And then he said to me, you've got to go see Nico.
He was here.
I only spoke to him over the telephone.
Yes, I was just out of hospital.
This is here.
He was here early in the summer.
He was now in September.
Oh, he's here?
Here again.
So we don't do business anymore together.
We always have to talk and come to see him.
But in a new age, he says that even better.
Jim Bowles.
Yes.
He was a great man.
He was a good book.
A lot of books have gone to the U.S., haven't they?
European things.
It is a steady flow.
It has been a steady flow.
Last year, it has been turning around slowly.
Because now you have more fluent Europe.
Not only that.
In your brother's office this morning, for instance, they said that they've basically seen the market in American institutions almost dry up.
One of the reasons is they're spending money on computers.
Well, it's the same.
It's terrible.
They're not spending money on books.
It's the same everything.
Is this concerning?
It's a shame.
It's terrible, isn't it?
It is a shame.
You've gone past.
Okay, you can have a modern library like, let's say, university library, college library, with no research into history.
That's fine, no problem.
Then you can do with the regular book, come out every month, every day, and you buy copies, and you know how many copies, because you have 25 students' interest, so you have at least six copies, I don't know, and that's that.
That's fine.
But when you have a library like, traditional library, like Houghton, like Beineken, like Yale, like Roger Shakespeare, New York historical, which is a shame.
I mean, such a beautiful collection.
Being well-known.
That they are trying to earn funds to... But they sold off a lot of the artwork and stuff.
No, no, no.
then it's different.
You have to have funds to buy the old book you think you may need in the future the moment you see it.
And that's all of the same.
You know Ken Carpenter at Harvard?
No, I haven't been to Harvard for a minute.
Nice man.
Bill Bond is a nice man, yeah.
Well, Ken Carpenter is...
He used to be at the business school, library, and now he's in charge of the white... Yes, at the famous collection of... Yes, Crest, I think it's called.
Yes, the Crest collection.
Well, he's now at Harvard.
He decides which books go off storage.
But he was telling me when he was buying books for Crest,
And I said, if you see a book that you think nobody's going to use, do you still buy it?
He said, I bought books that were 18th century.
They were uncut.
And he said, and they might stay uncut for another 200 years.
He said, but my job is to make sure it's there 200 years from now, and that person needs it.
And that's disappearing, isn't it?
That's how you mad too.
But I'm just saying, that attitude about buying the book for the future, and this is what I'm writing about in my new book, that concerns me now.
Yes, I mean, it would be a tremendous loss to the world when libraries, no, not librarians, managers, managing a library, they are no librarians anymore.
I'm studying, I'm writing about that too for the new book.
Amazing.
In the U.S., Columbia, which had the first school of library science, gone.
No more.
They closed it.
Berkeley, now they teach computer sciences.
How to catalog on the computer.
That's interesting stuff.
I think you have to know it.
But nobody's teaching bibliography anymore.
And Berkeley has a good tradition.
Well, it's in trouble there.
So it's a beautiful library.
Beautiful campus.
I was just there two weeks ago.
I spent a week out there.
That's going to be in there.
I'm writing about all of these things in my new book.
About these trends, about the library.
The libraries through history, the libraries of the future, the computers, the printed books.
It's becoming a strange world.
I think that without the book, it will lose what I think and do yourself.
a lot of scholarship.
You can't, I mean, have computers.
Yeah, I use it, and I don't use it now because I don't know how to use it.
But, okay.
But computer only, no books.
No.
The book is there to be there, not to be used.
But like Carpenter said,
day or tomorrow.
Or over a hundred years.
Or two hundred years.
Even though it has to be there.
It has to be there.
I start my new book, I'll tell you the story.
That's why I told the story.
The client is already born.
Sure.
Tell me if it's possible to discuss, because in this new book I'm really interested in this whole concept of book culture.
Does that phrase mean anything to you?
How would you define book culture?
And describe it here in Holland.
Now, you say you're a small country, but it's such an important book.
Holland is an important country.
There's a great history, also in books and in contributions to the book, trade, business, culture, whatever you want.
Great books were published in the country.
Also, great books that couldn't have been published anywhere else.
In the time that Eckhart came to Holland, he didn't come to Holland because Holland was such a nice country.
But he came because he could probably fail in Holland.
That's so important.
That is so important.
And that is why I must say that I live in a good country, yes.
Absolutely.
And even today, like I said,
When you want to establish yourself as a bookseller, you don't need to go to 700 instances before you can establish yourself.
You sit down and have a bookshop and take a test.
Because our... What's that word?
Constitution.
If the free word of the word full freedom,
You see, the word is sacred.
The word is sacred.
You see, it reads something like, you can publish whatever you want, you can do whatever you want, as long as you don't libel some.
But that is not the government, the state, who has resided, that the judge, the court,
They are the only one to.
So you have true freedom of the press.
I should know.
Whatever you want.
We have, I must say, the same tradition.
Of course yours is much older.
Tomorrow I'm going up to Leiden, which is a great, great book city.
That is.
I'm going there tomorrow morning and they're going to show the old library there.
Lovely.
Plus it was so important in the book trade as well, not just publication and book selling.
Even today.
Again, not one of the booming publishing towns, but a firm like Burrill and Leiden is there publications for all kinds of obscure countries.
Yeah, or for the Islam, they are the great publisher in the Western world on the Arabic sciences and sorts.
And then they have, and their printing personality, again, because they all become different.
But they were the only people, printers in the world, I think, who could print in college, whatever.
whether it was Sudanese or Ethiopian or whatever.
And why would they do it?
What is the... That was their specialty.
They were at a printing shop and they specialized in this kind of printing.
And doing things that can't be done anyplace else.
And doing things that then couldn't be done anyplace else.
Today it's different.
But they'll still do books.
I think they did a book on Count Libri, a brand new book,
published here.
Oh.
And it's in English.
No, no, that's .
Well, I'm saying, why did they have to come here to publish that book?
That book should have been published in England, should have been published in France.
Well, you don't know, but the Dutch publishing trade has always been a very important one.
I just heard in television or the news today that two Dutch firms published both
scientific material and all kinds of things have now merged.
And they formed together the largest publishing company specialized in scientific books in the world.
At a time when scientific books are in trouble, by the way.
But they say no.
And they do all kinds of things.
They're not only known on the...
Do you know the name of the company?
Elsevier.
Oh, it's Elsevier.
Elsevier together with Clever.
K-L-U-W-E-R.
The Yes Merch today.
But at least the Yes Merch that was publicized today.
Of course, the Elsevier is a famous, famous name.
Oh, that is the same name, not the same name.
Of course, but it goes back many hundreds of years in the 60th century.
Erasmus of Rotterdam, of course.
Well, that, of course, he was a humanist.
That's one of the things, you see, I always do regret.
In London, some years ago, comes up a copy of Erasmus Adagia.
He's famous for proverbs and sayings.
Right.
That runs from many, many editions in history.
He was always working on it.
And in London, a few years ago, comes out a copy of the book in early, I don't know, 11th edition or 10th edition or 9th edition, no matter what.
Full of annotations in the handwriting of the US, or his scholars, or his students, his disciples and acolytes.
Thousands, not a few words, thousands of annotations used
for the next edition.
God.
So I was wild and I read it.
I was already kind of... Excited?
No, not excited, but I was already retiring a little.
And so I called up and said, yes, now comes something new.
In his name, rest of his specialist.
we should try to get the government to buy it.
So he said, yes, but I don't know in this time period.
So I said, OK, try it.
And then I went to the university, and I said, listen, when they do not come to buy it, find some combination that you Dutch ladders can buy the book.
So finally, the Amsterdam ladders came to me and said, listen, we have so much money together.
And do you want to buy the book for us?
I said, no, I'm sorry, I can't.
First, you won't get it at that price.
And second, I have a private party interest.
You have a private, yeah.
Then you come up with a real bit.
It's different, but a bit that has no chance.
Has no chance.
Why should I accept that?
So we gave the bit to Quartz.
And the words was out.
Right away, yeah.
And then I was bidding against the book center from Basel, who was bidding against, oh, who went for the University Library in Basel.
They were just working on the new, complete edition of Erasmus words.
So they got it?
No, because my client, he wanted it.
Oh, this was a private individual.
I was a private individual.
I said, next to me, I said, you're wrong.
And I said,
I told him what he was sitting next to you.
I told him what he was going to fetch.
I said, you wouldn't get it under so many pounds.
So that was about the limit paid.
I would have gone on in this case because that's the thing.
And he, graciously,
gave it to, not to represent it, but made it available to the scholars in Basel University to study it for the annual edition.
Where was this auction?
In London.
How long ago?
I don't know, something like that.
Do you remember, just tell me again what the title of the book was, the Erasmus?
Erasmus?
Yes.
Erasmus, Adagia, A-D-A, G-I-A,
I'll check the auction record on it.
It's a very wealthy country.
I think the guts... That's not a lot of money for a national treasure.
which they say it should have, and they don't have.
Listen, it's one of the very few great humanists from the early 16th century, Erasmus.
And we don't have much manuscript material in his hand in this country, needing nothing.
This was in his hand, too, you think?
For greater part, in his hands, or at the front.
It was a copy that must have been on his desk.
And everybody, anybody who came with some new analogy... Rick wrote it in a nail.
This is so important to me because I'm doing a chapter on books that are important as artifacts, that have been read and that you can determine, like Coleridge's annotated books,
You know, this is of extraordinary interest.
It is, absolutely.
And I'll check the, I'll find it.
Don't worry about it.
I can find it by checking auction records.
Of course it is.
And it's, I don't know, it's a 15, 23 edition.
15, 20, 23?
That's actually like 400, 700 pounds.
Something like that.
And your client was a private... He was a private man.
And what will he do with it at some point, do you think?
He has a lot of money.
Yes, after books as well.
Maybe, will he sell it or give it away?
I don't know.
That's his decision.
His privilege he can do is to save property.
Of course, of course.
And I respect that.
I'm just wondering at some point... Well, you can't say.
I mean, nobody knows before about that.
I never believed that...
Gaskell Nolan's collection would come up for sale.
So there's some, no doubt.
Read my book, though.
He says it, he says in there, I'm going to let my heirs decide.
He says, and I'm sure they looked at the inheritance tax on that and said, sell it, you know.
It's too bad, because, and plus they did that beautiful catalog.
And I think that's what he wanted out of it, was a catalog.
Well, that was, and you must say, it is not true.
Much grandeur and respect.
Absolutely.
Beautiful capital.
So Christie's is going to do it in three parts.
I'll go to the sale.
Book department.
Very old friend.
Well, Massey's gone now, you know.
No, he's not gone.
He was here as well.
I couldn't meet the people.
That's exactly what my really good friends.
like the Krauses and Honey Krauses, the woman.
Anne-Marie told me, really urged me to see you.
Ah sure, Anne-Marie was here, Mary-Anne was here, together with Roland.
I met Mary-Anne, I'm sorry.
Mary-Anne, and the mother was here, but Honey is a woman I really adore, great woman, married to a great bookman.
Let nobody ever tell you that Dr. Peter Krauss was not a great bookman, but he always asked for a money.
He wasn't.
You know, I just saw Tenchert the other day, and people have their attitudes on him, but he's interesting.
That's why they wanted to talk to him.
And he said that when Krauss was very sick, they would still bring him to his place and carry him in, literally, and he was buying books.
He was active to the very end.
He was a devoted bookman.
He was.
He did great things.
He didn't just happen to arrive.
People like to tell him.
He had courage.
He had knowledge.
He had feelings.
He was influenced.
But I know him many, many years, and I think it was one of my first clients.
I don't know if I remember the first thing I've shown them.
He was helpful to you in the beginning when you were getting started?
No.
But I always respected him.
And he knew his stuff.
He generated a lot of resentment.
But that happens.
Because he was a kind of aerogenics, he was a kind of, well, he could be very inquirited.
He was, no, no, he was in... I had one of my great friends in the trade.
He was a man from A, Elton.
That's it.
We worked together.
Not... And...
Hans Krauss, in a way, he enjoyed when we were there.
He said, Sunday he said to us, the good thing with you when you come is, at least we can talk books, you know.
He had some dealings with Haven or more too.
They sold him the Shakespeare's.
Shakespeare's.
And it was, I think it was, no, it was not Folter, it was Karabian, I think, Karabian, you know what I mean?
Sure, Karabian.
He's the one that brought the books up to Cambridge.
Brought them to Haven O'Moore's house, and Haven O'Moore wouldn't even let him come in.
Wouldn't even invite him in for a glass of water.
He asked if he could use the bathroom.
He said there was a gas station down in the corner.
Can you believe that?
I talked to him a couple of years ago.
He was still alive?
He was still alive two years ago when I talked to him.
He can't be all that at all.
He must be in his 80s.
He retired.
Are you still working?
Yes, down in Delaware.
Yourself, are you retired now from the business?
Well, I sold my business.
Did he miss it?
Yes and no.
I'm doing a tremendous job in the book.
Some of the great art libraries asked me to evaluate the old books in their old books.
So I'm working already since June last year to evaluate something I cannot find in some old books.
So that keeps you active?
And that took me, at least it took me up the street.
I did it before I got this heart problem.
About four days a week, every morning I went in, and I answered him out, and then I went left at 1 o'clock.
So you set your own schedule?
And that was beautiful, and then I reported every month, and...
You've had quite an interest... Now, this must be all reference material over here from... Well, it is not old.
No, I have... That is most, but then I have a university library.
I have the greatest collection.
What?
What's in front of you?
Your library?
No, the university library in Amsterdam.
Oh, that's your reference library.
Oh, that's fantastic.
And I have free access to it.
And it's close?
Yeah, but I mean, I'm teasing.
So you would go over there to do your work.
That's very interesting.
They're fantastic.
They have one of the great books out of the 19th century, this country was a man called Muller, Frederick Muller.
He was German.
He came to Holland in the 1830s, 1840s.
established himself as a bookseller, became one of the great booksellers of the period.
He did a lot of good catalogs, specialised in many other things.
Americana, he was one of the great suppliers for, let's say, Carter Brown, George, all the great collectors in the land in the other days.
He found that he had the idea when we, and we wanted to be knowledgeable, wanted to be capable of informing our clients, we have to have the books.
And he was instrumental in forming the first library devoted
to bibliography at... Mrs. Muller?
Mr. Muller, yes.
M-U-L-L-E-R.
No.
Frederick.
Frederick Muller.
And did you know him?
No.
He died.
Oh, he died?
I don't know.
Maybe something like that.
No, no, I didn't.
Okay, obviously.
I'm not ashamed to tell you I didn't know.
No, no, I'm sorry.
I get lost there on the dates.
No, no.
But he was a bookseller.
He was a great bookseller.
And he persuaded...
It's interesting, again.
Not only persuaded, but he contributed in a big way, money-wise and book-wise, to the form of this library.
Another one then was Nyhoff, a firm still-existing, but no rare book department anymore.
Mathias Nyhoff.
And those were great times.
And then it was taken over by the Dutch Books House Association.
No.
was taken over which was taken elaborate the library so where is that what's the name of the library the library of the Dutch book sounds association it's now incorporated in the Dutch and there is a tremendous collection and they all died and have a book as well I don't think they're not present in the Netherlands
My book had a very fine review on the Netherlands, by the way.
It had a full page.
No, I have it at home.
They sent it to me.
And then they did a television documentary, and two of the people in my book, the black man, Charles Blockson, and the Jewish fellow, Aaron Lansky, who saves the Yiddish books, they called me, I arranged, they gave me a credit on the film.
And it was on Dutch national television.
I didn't know that.
Yeah, and they sent me a copy, but I was so very proud.
I saw that you were reading paper for the Grosje Club.
Two weeks and one of the Grosje Club.
I love the Grosje Club, it's very... Yeah, but I don't use it, I mean... It's good for me.
Of course, it's good for anybody, because they have a good library.
They have a wonderful library, and the people I meet are very...
helpful to me.
I remember six and five.
Yeah, I mean, I only go down once or twice a year, but it's still worth whatever it costs me, you know.
But since I don't struggle much anymore.
I used to go one, twice, three times every year to the United States or more.
Most of your business was outside of Holland, would you say?
Yes.
I have also elected position.
a position, that I had very good Dutch clients, institutional and non-institutional.
Like the University Libraries, like the some of the University Libraries, like the Martime Museums, I showed a lot of Martime Museums here, other such maps, that kind of thing.
I've been quite good in time.
That story you just told me a few minutes ago about the Erasmus, and you were representing a collector.
That was quite a responsible thing.
On the one hand, you have a customer, but you said to the university, look, this is a matter of national importance.
You're basically going against yourself there in a way, weren't you?
You're saying you should be getting this book.
Absolutely.
I want to alert you to this.
Well, I would have told my client they wouldn't have listened to me.
And they would have taken another... Another agent.
Other agent.
And I would have told them, listen, take your hands off the book.
I think it's something that belongs to the Netherlands and not particularly to you.
You would have told them that?
I would have told them that.
He would have voted.
He still would have bought it.
I think so.
He is a persistent client, yes.
And he wants something, he wants something.
And he's right.
Then he should be.
But your position is, your country came first.
My country?
No, not my country.
Not the country, but... Yes, I think that this was the opportunity for the Dutch government to buy the only great Erasmus Heiden.
still can be expected to come for sale.
And they declined.
They declined.
And that bothers me.
It bothers me.
And we see it happen all the time, you know.
I mean, Winston Churchill's books are circulating, you know.
Why did that happen?
Shouldn't his books have been... He was a great reader.
He was a winner of the Nobel Prize.
I mean, his library should have stayed together, it seems to me.
Don't you think so?
Well, that's getting...
And thus everything had to stay together.
But I think when, after how long?
450 years, the opportunity comes for the government to buy a thing like that.
They should hesitate.
They should embrace me.
Thank you for bringing it to Robert's notice.
But it was the money.
And how much were they willing to spend, just out of curiosity?
They were willing to spend, and then they had a grant of one of the Dutch collectors, of, I don't know, I think half of the money, something like 900,000 euros, which was then $500,000.
And it finally went for about $700,000, you said, right?
It went for, yes, something like that.
So it wasn't even close?
No, they weren't.
I mean, when they told me we had 900,000 euros to spend, I said, thank you very much, I won't get it.
What was the estimate?
Do you remember what they were doing?
I'm not sure.
I think in dollars, two, three hundred.
So they barely came in at the estimate then?
Just over... So that's never... They were brave.
That's never... And I told them, you're not brave, you won't get it.
No.
Listen, that is...
It doesn't make sense.
No, you're giving them advice.
They asked my advice, sorry.
And you're saying, listen, I've been in this business all my life, I'm telling you.
You won't get it.
They should have just had an open ticket.
I mean, they can afford it.
At least in the States of the Netherlands.
The States of the Netherlands must be capable of making
I say, one million dollars extra to buy... One way or another.
To buy a great thing.
They buy paintings for, I don't know, five, eight, ten million dollars.
That's the most amazing thing there.
And then they buy the wrong ones as well, because the good ones are already here.
I love that.
Listen, I don't want to take up too much of your time.
Oh, I'm not... If you get tired or anything, just let me know.
But I think that I have spoken enough, so then you have some questions to ask us.
So I'm just delighted that... Because it's, of course, like always with me, it's a mishmash of all kinds of things.
But, like, my book is a mishmash of things.
I love a lot of different things.
And this book is... You've touched on ten different subjects that I'm interested in.
So ask me things, then I shall...
tried to... Who were some of the great collectors that you knew?
I mean, and I don't want to talk about customers that, you know... Well, in this country or everywhere.
Anywhere, yeah.
Well, I knew all the fun, but I knew many of the great collectors, people like Henry Taylor, people like Tom Streeter, people like... Well, what would Streeter buy?
He was Americana.
But I was Americana.
You were Americana, too?
Oh, sure.
until my last move, you know.
Explain how you became expert in that area, over here.
How is it that you became... Well, I don't know.
But I was an expert.
Yeah, still am I. I know the... I know Americana.
Of course, when we talk about Americana, we're talking about exploration, we're talking about... Oh, yeah.
That's one I can't believe.
And we're talking about charts.
Echoing to see...
He took exploration.
Who did?
Echo.
Oh, really?
Umberto Ethel?
Umberto Ethel.
I'm seeing him.
But he didn't buy... He bought my facsimile editions.
He bought the facsimiles.
Was this while he was writing the novel?
No.
But that's interesting.
He came here.
What did you think of him?
I don't know, my Italian is not great, he's not so perfect.
He was together with the Dutch also.
And he came absolutely unexpected.
He just dropped in?
He just dropped in and then somebody said to me, they mentioned a name, I'm not good in names anyhow.
I'm not good in faces, I'm not good in names.
And I didn't realize who the man was.
So the first, later it became more.
Yeah.
Well, he's a very famous author in that.
I'm interested in him because of his interest in so many different aspects of books.
He came to see the collection of Ritman.
I don't know whether that's a collection of Ritman.
He is one of the few Dutch collectors of importance of the last pre-war years, post-war years.
And he collects a very
a special subject.
Alchemy?
Alchemy.
Alchemy, anything like that.
He got himself in trouble because of his lab.
He got himself in trouble?
To go over
You didn't spend too much money on the books?
It happens.
Did he keep the books?
Or did he lose the books?
Well, I've covered a lot.
If you think there's anything that I've missed... I know, I know.
I'm like you, I talk too much.
I'm sorry?
No, no, I talk too much.
That's my problem.
I love the stories, though, I have to say.
What was the greatest
What's your greatest book experience?
Can you think of what your greatest, the most satisfying?
I must say the most satisfying lie was the answer.
I think that was the greatest item anybody, any bookseller could expect.
Really?
Absolutely.
I mean, given always that this is not worldwide, otherwise America would have been moved, I think they weren't.
So, it is... Erasmus was one of the really great thinkers of the important period of moving around everything that existed.
Religion and science and whatever.
He's the first professional writer too.
And he was there.
He was part of it.
And then you can buy a book like that.
That his thoughts are...
in the present time, and a unique copy.
No, another thing I've always pleased, very pleased, but they are all not compared to, let's say, the great manuscripts that I've spoken in the place, or nothing, but it pleases me.
I wrote completely unexpected.
A manuscript, a Spanish manuscript,
the original binding, but the original binding has something that is hardly known to exist.
It's known to have existed, but from paintings, particularly Flemish paintings they show.
They are manuscripts, prayer books, in kind of silk,
They call it chimise.
And that was, I think, one of the great things I handled, yes.
And how long ago was this?
Seven years.
Really, so recent.
And this again was at auction?
No, I bought it from a company, because it's so pure.
An unknown, you said it was unknown?
Completely.
It came out of the blue.
Where did it come from?
A private collection or a home?
A private collection.
The thing was that I was never knew and never recognized to be one of the great manuscript specialists.
But some day we were in London for some book fair, I think it was.
I was sitting at a hotel lounge and we just ordered an English tea.
complete with them.
There on Sunday afternoon, and in walks, and quality, I know, many days.
Always been good friends.
And so I said, come on, sit down and have a tea.
So we sat down and had a tea.
And then, we were talking short, and he said, I got something, I know you're not interested.
And it's so fantastic, and he told the story, he said, who told you I'm not interested?
I said, Adrian, why don't I show it to you?
I said, of course, come on.
You had your interest.
You had your attention.
Let's see it.
So I said, you have a prize?
They said, I can't tell you the prize I can't sell it to you because I gave somebody 24 hours until tomorrow night.
Monday night, the right of first refusal.
Mr. Fenton doesn't buy it.
I know your price, and I shall say no then, but probably I say yes.
So, through the morning, he calls me up in my room and says, I'm free.
Are you?
I said yes or not.
It means the price, yes.
Can you describe it a little more for me?
Did you open the Royal Library?
I'm sorry?
I'm not going to have time, it's true.
It is a Spanish manuscript for the Italian market.
You know that there was an information in Spain.
Yes.
some good miniatures, manuscript of some standing, if you want, some jewelry.
In the original leather binding, stamped leather binding, new, and over leather binding, this chemise in the most beautiful red silk.
In a beautiful condition.
At 1450, 16.
1450, 16.
1460, I think.
At Mount Royal Labyrinth, eh?
How many of these?
Do you remember how big it was?
No, it also didn't.
It was very, very precise manuscript of this.
So did you buy it and then sell it to the Royal Labyrinth?
I didn't sell it to the Royal Labyrinth.
They bought it.
I went to see the manuscript department, because I couldn't decide whether the manuscript was Italian or Spanish.
I decided to ask for Spanish.
So I went to see the curator of manuscripts in the library.
And then she saw the combination.
So she said, we should show that to the
to our binding specialist.
Specialist for bindings.
Well, she said, he is not here, he is in the museum.
I said, okay, let's go down and see him.
And he was rather kind of annoyed to see me there because he was doing some work.
and had taken off some hours from the library to do the work.
This is up at the Hague now, the Book Museum of the Hague?
No, it is in the Royal Library.
They are not... The Royal Library here?
The Royal Library in the Hague.
Yes.
I want to be here tomorrow.
Maybe I'll have time to take a look.
Then, I said, no, she said, we are not coming from us.
We want to show you something.
I said, I didn't want to show you, I don't want to show you anything.
She said, I should go and we should go and show you the thing.
And so I said, okay, but do you have?
So I showed it to him and he said, come on.
Yeah, absolutely.
And then nothing.
I said, he never had mentioned twice.
Then some week later, 10 days later, he called me and I said, Nico, what do you want?
I said, what do you mean you have to do?
I think I can get money available to buy it.
So I mentioned my price, and two weeks later he said, yes, we're going to buy it.
So you had bought it yourself?
Of course.
I'm happy to have a deal with books that I had on commission.
So this was already yours?
Sure.
And you weren't in any great rush to sell it anywhere either?
No, why?
I mean, something you never... The problem was that at a certain moment, again, there's always problems.
that the board of directors of the Royal Library, they decided that before buying it, because the manuscript was not worth the money, the silver was not worth the money, the combination was worth the money.
So was the binding and the manuscript and the illuminations?